So yeah, while Matt and Rowan are setting up here, I
just want to introduce them.
Because it's not every day that you get to see people
visiting from the future, but you're about to see that happen
right now.
We're very fortunate to be visited by some researchers who are
coming to tell us about the future of science publishing and communication
from the future.
It's a special day today.
Rowan is the CEO and founder of Curvenote, where
he leads the development of tools designed to free scientific communication from
PDFs.
Rowan is also the founder of the Continuous Science Foundation,
a non-profit organization for the next generation of science communication.
CSF is developing standards to support a more continuous and compos
able model of science.
Rowan is also visiting his alma mater today.
He has a PhD from UBC in geophysics, computational
geophysics, and has received multiple awards for innovative research dissemin
ation and open education resources, including visible geology, and interactive geos
cience modeling application used by over 1 million students globally.
Matt Akamatsu is an assistant professor of biology at the
University of Washington in Seattle.
He's also the co-founder of the Discourse Graphs
Project, supported by the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative and Navigation Fund.
They're creating systems and software tools for modular research in the
age of AI.
Matt Akamatsu is a recipient of the 2020 Porter Prize
for Research Excellence from the American Society of Cell Biology, the K
99 Pathway to Independence Award, and the Experimental Foundations
Beyond the Journal Award.
Matt Akamatsu received his PhD in biophysics at
Yale, did postdoc at Berkeley, and started at ISLAB
in UW.
Take it away, guys.
Matt Akamatsu: Excellent.
Thank you so much.
I'm absolutely thrilled and excited to talk to you today about
the movement towards modular open science and some of the work that
we're doing at Continuous Science Foundation and Curb Note
towards these goals.
And so today, science is trapped in this sort of paper-shaped
box.
We're communicating our discoveries using print-era concepts that constrain
the way that we communicate, evaluate, and ultimately build towards scientific knowledge
and progress.
But the science that's being produced has changed so massively with
larger data sets, larger scale collaborations, continuous sharing of computational notebooks and
graphs.
The way that we communicate science has really not kept up to
that change.
Our mission at the Continuous Science Foundation is to help move
the open science movement from sort of the sole focus on reading
and access, the open access movement, to a future that's more
focused on utility and reuse that's built on these same foundations
of openness and designed for modern discovery patterns, where the code, data,
protocols, methods are available.
They're interconnected.
They're modular.
They can be composed together through remixing and sort of importing
somebody else's work.
And that really is the ethos of science, is building upon
other people's work, is standing on the shoulders of giants.
There's an illusion published by Louis Albert Necker in 18
32.
He was a crystallographer.
And this is the Necker cube.
And it's 12 lines on a page.
But if you stare at the bottom, the left sort of side
pops out and it changes and it flips orientation.
If you look at the top, again, there's this perceptual
reversal.
It has the same underlying data, but different interpretations, different stories that
you can tell about fitting those data points together.
And this is the way that I like to think about modular
science, is we have these Lego bricks, these modules of science, the
components, the figures, the equations, the data sets, the scripts, the visualization
routines, those protocols, questions, claims, evidence, and they're in these different
spaces.
They can live on the floor, scattered.
They can be sorted into buckets or assembled on a shelf as
sort of a published paper.
And so the assembly into a paper, it tells a story.
It's that narrative that introduces a new concept.
It changes minds.
The components of scientific discourse are bundled together into that sort
of narrative, that traditional way of publishing.
This composed artifact, that paper, that story.
But our scientific ways, our sharing industry, and the standards
today, they demand that you sort of glue that trophy together when
you share it.
That eight page paper with its four sort of paneled figures,
a zip file supplement.
It's all fused together.
And if you want to reuse a figure or a data set,
you have to sort of chisel out that figure.
You have to take a screenshot of it, copy that data set.
And as soon as you take it out of that piece of
paper, that figure gets amnesia.
It sort of forgets all about its attribution, its trust,
its licensing.
It loses its context.
It loses like that license and that credit behind it.
All of that rich metadata that sort of our scientific commons
are designed to support.
And so these were really the challenges that prompted the first wave
of modular science.
Many people recognize that it's not enough to share an advertisement
of your experiment.
You should share the data and the methods and the code underlying
it.
And so the prescription in 2010 was for modular science.
It was pretty simple.
You just break it into pieces and you put it into buckets.
And you put it in the appropriate repository for that component.
So protocols.
io, you share your protocols.
Figures go to fig share.
Software heritage is the place that you share your code.
A specialized data repository for genomics or microscopy data.
And Zenodo can sort of take up all of the rest.
And so these are the buckets of modular science.
The digital repositories for archiving, tagging, organizing your data,
protocols, code, and figures.
And they really are actually excellent buckets.
They exist fit for purpose for science.
But they're largely designed for after the work is done.
When you're starting to organize it, package it up, and put
it in these places.
So tidying up your workspace, putting the blocks away, and sort
of pointing them from your glued together trophy on a shelf.
And they're structured.
They're organized.
They strive to be these sort of tidy, curated spaces.
And you fill out your intake form, specify your authors, license, description,
your ORCID, your ROAR, your funders.
All of these references.
And it's really a very high bar to share work.
And if you have some visualization code or a scratch script that
you really know is the secret of how your work hangs together,
it's like the bar for sharing that is so high.
So all of those small things sort of get lost.
They don't fit together on the shelf with that glued together
trophy.
And they don't really amount to enough to justify the investments
to sort of formally request bucket status.
And that's the aggregation of all of these small components
of sort of the workflows and scripts of science fitting together.
That's where the tacit knowledge of science lives of all
of those workflow scripts of saying, yeah, I've seen that before.
I'll grab you the notebook or I'll grab you that
script or I've seen that last year and that's a
dead end.
And so these buckets are sort of both that very high bar
and they're not fully aligned with science and with research, which
is often much more much less structured than sort of the scientific
method like laid out on a piece of paper step by step.
That's that's how it works.
It's much more fluid, much more serendipitous.
You need to access all of the pieces to build new things
and you sort of dump the buckets out onto the floor.
And this this is the space to build, to experiment, to support
that sort of serendipity of science.
Maybe the equivalent of sort of leaving of that Petri dish
out and Fleming discovering penicillin in 1928.
Or maybe you have like slightly better lab hygiene protocols and setups
and software so that you don't step on the pieces of
Lego on the floor, but sort of have that goal to access
those pieces readily and build them and put them together so that
you can pull data from someone's lab in Tokyo, pull a
protocol from Germany and remix them with your ideas to build something
new, to learn something new, to discover something new.
And so these these are the the three states of scientific components
and modularity.
They're on the floor, that chaos, that serendipity,
that remixing in the buckets organized by types, protocols, data, reposit
ories, that's that first wave of modular science that was really
tackling that problem.
Or they're on the shelf, that composed artifact, that paper, that
story.
And all of these are are right.
They're they're correct.
They're like good ways that are fit for purpose for that
task.
And they're sort of that different side of that necr
acube, that that illusion that flips and pops in and out
for that right time that you need it for teaching or learning
or discovering or building.
And so I think this this is what the next wave of
modular science is about, is not just sort of breaking it apart
to share, which is sort of somewhat unnatural, especially if you have
these sort of smaller artifacts that don't fit on a shelf
sort of behind that trophy, is thinking about those sort of aggregate
components that that are the connective space of science.
And sharing those, there's such a high bar for for sharing
those in in this sort of first wave.
And it ends in this sort of disconnection, this constellation of
research artifacts, where you have to tell a fable to imagine
how it's all connected together, instead of actually connecting it together.
And the second wave of modular science is about improving that packaging
experience, working with the researcher as they're on the floor, as
they're building, that is where the modularity emerges.
You don't write a manuscript top to bottom 10,000 un
broken words, one after another, with perfect figures, you iterate on the
figures, you iterate one panel at a time, one script at a
time, asking for feedback in this sort of modular composable way
with with collaborators, and building up from that modular work.
And it's a connected graph of discourse or computational narratives, supported
by modern tooling like Obsidian or Mist Markdown, that can
define the context of that data and how it travels together.
And the result of all of this is sort of this multiplic
ative additive compounding effect of how these things come together.
And so I think it's also not worth losing sight of
the end goal of this is actually to tell some of these
new stories.
These compositions are the point of science.
And maybe we should aspirationally have these less be less like
trophies on a shelf behind glass, but shared a little bit
more continuously a little bit earlier.
And here there's like this meta study that is crying out
from here of how teapots are associated with the Lego
bricks on the shelf that you actually want to pull these out
and put them together and try something new.
And so that that is like a very different thought of modular
science than this first wave.
So instead of thinking about the figures off on their own, we
're thinking about the structure of these artifacts inside.
So not import figure, but import figure from a paper.
And that can compose all the way down so that you can
get inside of these artifacts and bring modularity with you as
it's traveling throughout the ecosystem.
And so I, I just want to give a flavor of sort
of the syntax of how we're thinking about, about modular science
in this second wave.
And it really does, I think the Lego metaphor works well here
because it does have these specific ways that science fits together.
This is the schemas and the standards and the pieces behind
research of how they click together that you can make very different
things.
And there isn't glue here.
You're also able to take them apart and put them into
different compositions.
And that is the goal of the project out of the Contin
uous Science Foundation called Open Exchange Architecture, OXA or O
XA.
They are new standards for modular and composable scientific content.
And you can learn more about that at OXA.
dev.
And this is a large project that's bringing together a lot
of existing players in the scientific ecosystem, all the way from author
ing tools like Korto or Mist Markdown that people
might have started to use to publishers like eLife for traditional
manuscripts or Open Archive for preprints, as well as licensing
organizations like Creative Commons who are involved in sort of bringing all
of these together into a modern computational, complete modular and composable
format that can actually support our scientific narratives.
And so some of the principles that we have for OX
A is, of course, it's open.
It's a JSON schema-based representation.
It's a tree-based representation of the scientific content specifically.
And so this is anything from the paragraph, citations, figures, equations,
or code.
It is extensible to these sort of new types of data,
composable so that you can bring one person's work and
compose it inside of yours, typed down, very similar to the sort
of the at proto schemas, and thinking about that interoper
ability modularity.
And throughout all of this, really thinking about the computation as a
first class citizen within this schema itself.
It's also going through, we're thinking at this stage a
lot about the governance and how we're actually building this up.
And so there's an RFC process that actually goes through
and we're beginning this movement, I think, in the right way
from that perspective, so that we're actually building this up and
being fit for purpose all the way through.
And it also, of course, has an at proto recognition on that.
So you can transfer out of this much more schema, sorry, tree-
based schema, which is sort of the native representation of OX
A, to something that's a little closer to what at proto
works with, which is a facet-based piece where you can
actually have some of those annotations, which might be a citation
or an additional abbreviation or something that is deeply nested
inside of this schema, but can be distributed from sort of a
social perspective.
And so there's a lot of thought going in here.
And this is definitely early stages.
And so we're inviting a lot of people to come, be
involved in sort of the definition of the schema as it starts
to exist.
And I want to just give a couple different flavors with my
Curvenote hat on about some of the case studies that
we're bringing to bear with these ideas.
And so this Elemental Microscopy is a journal that
we're working with that's trying to do something a little
bit more exciting than just sort of a picture on a page
with a blowout of that sort of one and a half
terabytes of data is you should actually be able, similar to
Google Maps, to just like zoom into it directly as you're
reading, is we have all of these sorts of visuals out there
already.
Scientists are using them in their day-to-day work.
So we should be able to compose those into the ways that
we are sharing science.
And this is speaking to that modularity as well.
That one and a half terabytes doesn't live inside of
the paper.
It does live in its appropriate bucket, but it can be composed
into the way that we share and read and communicate science.
So thinking about not a constellation of research objects that we're
sort of painting the stars, but actually showing you how it all
fits together.
The other project that's one of the other projects that Cur
venote is working on is a partnership with Open Archive.
Open Archive is the parent organization around Bio Archive and
Med Archive, which are the largest biomedical preprint servers.
And we are currently reprocessing 8.
1 terabytes of articles to this new format.
And so this is something that's ongoing right now.
There's about half a million preprints that are coming together.
And this is going to support more exciting reading experiences where you
can hover over a figure and bring that in.
You can dive into that right away.
And so this is within the context of a single article that
you can bring that modular piece to bear in the context and
bring that sort of forward in your way of working.
But that also should be able to exist across
research articles.
And so some research articles, if you hover over them, are closed
access and they're not that exciting.
But if they're open access or a preprint, you should
be able to bring the figure from that to bear right as
you're reading.
And so really thinking again about this sort of modular composable
way of working that really can improve both the reading experience of
a researcher.
Like if if you have a reference that says see figure three
in someone at all, like you have to scroll to the bottom
of the page, download the PDF, jump through a paywall, bring
it up in your reference manager, scroll to page 50 and actually
get the the figure there.
And by the time you've got there, you've lost all
of your context and machines often can't follow all of that
work either.
And so this, this I think is thinking about that sort of
next wave of modular science, both from the user experience standpoint, the
schemas that are supporting it, as well as the ways that
sort of the community can get involved throughout.
And so not thinking about trophies on a shelf that are
glued together, but pieces that you can take.
And those are a starting point for the next analysis, lowering the
barrier to entry for inclusion in these buckets that you can maybe
package these up with the pieces that you are sharing and still
be indexed in, in these different ways, as well as supporting
researchers as they're working on the floor with better tooling, better
graph based waves of working better computational notebooks that actually support the
organization and communication of all of these results.
And so that is, I think the way this new wave of
modular science is not saying one of these ways of working is
better than the other, but it's flipping that perspective back and
forth between all of these different ways of working all at once.
And so I think the other really exciting piece that was talked
about at the start as well is this is our time.
This is our semblance of this space and there is so
much going on that we can actually affect massive change in the
way that science is done.
So I am Groen Cockett.
I'm the CEO of Curvenote and also one of
the co-founders of Continuous Science Foundation and follow me
on Blue Sky.
So thank you very much. - Thank you very much. -
Thank you. - I think we're doing a few times before. -
Thank you. - Thank you. - Thank you. - Hello,
yes, great. -
Hello, yes. - Great. - - -
Well, thank you,
Rowan, for such an inspiring talk.
Rowan and I first met about this time last year at
a Continuous Science Foundation workshop that Rowan organized in Ban
ff in which we converged at this idea of modular research
as a new paradigm for open science.
And so I'll show today how our research lab at the
University of Washington uses modular science principles for interoperable and
extensible open research practices. -
Why don't I turn this down a little bit?
There's a little bit of an echo.
Or is it this?
Turn that off.
Better?
Better.
Yes.
So my name is Matt Akamatsu.
I'm an assistant professor of biology at the University of Washington.
And today I'll show how discourse graphs help our labs to
enable modular and interoperable research practices.
So I started my lab at the University of Washington about three
and a half years ago.
Here we are on the right.
And I've also co-founded the discourse graphs project, which is
an open science and collaboration, tooling, software development platform, and organization.
And through these two organizations, we design, build, and test new ways
to do scientific research that enables better, faster research collaboration and sharing
of our research outputs in real time.
These projects are motivated by many of the systemic barriers to research
collaboration that Rowan just described that have been exacerbated now
that generative AI is a regular participant in the scientific research
and publishing process.
That is best exemplified by this scandal that broke out sometime
last year in the International Conference on Learning Representations, where it
became apparent that the majority of, or many of the submissions as
well as reviews for this conference, for these conference papers on machine
learning, were entirely generated by low-quality AI that didn't make
any sense.
And so that caused this researcher to say we're entering an
era in which distinguishing real science science from low-quality AI
will be essential.
An AI tool did an analysis of these reviews and submissions that
indicated that over 20% of the submissions were entirely AI-gener
ated and another large percentage of them were moderately AI-gener
ated.
And so it says it seems that 21% of these reviews
may be AI.
But that leads to the same type of question, how strongly should
we trust this particular report and this tool?
So the caveat, LLM-generated text detection is not
perfect.
So this is illustrating that we need some better grounded piece
of information, some evidence to help us to weigh how much we
should trust this measurement and by extension how much we should trust
these scientific research submissions that up until now have been the substrate
for how you share your research communication.
But that's under tremendous strain because of large language models.
So we wonder, in this day and age, what is the appropriate
source code for scientific communication in the age of AI?
And I pose this question tongue-in-cheek because, as many
of you know, the role of source code itself has changed quite
a bit over the past year in programming because it now can
be freely generated by AI and regenerated from specific instructions.
So we expect the same transformation may occur for scientific research communication,
where up until now the state-of-the-art has been this
long-form narrative PDF that's dozens of pages long, compiles
five years worth of work, and several dozen results into this single
document with a linear authorship list.
Likely, we'll need some other substrate for communicating our research
that is smaller than this long-form journal PDF, but larger than
the individual raw data or text.
And our principles of operation, as Rowan introduced, are that we
'd like this system to be reusable so that we can build
upon different elements of the research process and synthesize them into
living theories of knowledge about our favorite corner of the natural world.
We need each element to have clear provenance and attribution,
and we'd love for it to center human decision-making in
an era when the AI scientists are getting increasingly powerful.
Absent a deliberate design for collaboration, we might find ourselves out
of a job for the fun parts of doing science.
Therefore, our goal is to decouple research into modular elements
that each can be reused, cited, and synthesized.
Those atomic elements are questions, claims, and evidence, which we connect into
a graph.
This data model comes from the science philosopher Stephen Tullman,
who argues that science is less a series of monolithic truths
and more a series of claims that are supported by more or
less evidence.
And over time, you gather more evidence, some of the claims go
away and new claims arise.
And so we'd like to be able to capture not only
the claims, but the evidence that supports them so that we can
update them.
And this particular project is the product of a five and a
half year collaboration between myself and human computer interaction researcher Joelle
Chan at the University of Maryland.
And together, we build both the information model and plugins to popular
note-taking software so that we can run our labs on this
modular research paradigm and test what works, what genuinely helps the advancement
of our lab's research.
So to this end, we've built discourse graphs, which are both
a protocol and an app for interoperable knowledge exchange.
Here's the information model.
We take our scientific arguments and projects and decouple them
into questions, claims and evidence and connect them into a graph.
The question is the unknown that you'd like to make known
with your research project.
The claim is the current answer to the research question, which it
wants to be supported by one or more lines of evidence.
Each piece of evidence is a specific observation from your work with
an outcome and it's grounded in a single study or experiment
or at least a published research article.
The article grounds the evidence.
The evidence supports or opposes the claim and the claim, when
incomplete, always motivates a new experiment that you want to do driving
the research research cycle forward.
I'll give a historical example.
70 years ago, there were two competing claims for what is the
three-dimensional structure of DNA.
Is it a double helix or is it a triple hel
ix?
Where are the negatively charged phosphates in this DNA helix?
And there was no evidence to distinguish between these two competing claims
until Rosalind Franklin's famous x-ray diffraction experiment
showed this very characteristic diffraction pattern that gave us some information
about what the spacing is likely to be between these DNA bases
and that supported the double helix model for the structure of
DNA.
So in this discourse graphs framing, Rosalind Franklin could have
posted this single result to the group, to the group's personal
data server, I suppose, and said, "This is a result.
It's reproducible.
I'm going to show you -- I'm going to tell you
the observation.
I'm going to tell you the -- I'm going to give
you the associated figure and a little methods context.
Let's figure out what it means together." And in order to
strengthen their claim that DNA has a double helix structure, Watson
and Crick would have needed to cite Franklin's piece of
evidence.
Otherwise, it would remain an untested claim.
And what I love about this model is that it creates an
automatic attribution structure that appropriately credits Franklin's contribution to this
discovery over the course of just making a stronger scientific argument.
Alternatively, in a world absent evidence, the modelers could instead request
that somebody do this DNA diffraction experiment because it's important
for their model.
And then some -- an experimentalist might claim that experiment, carry it
out, tell them what the result was.
And then the modelers get some credit for their intellectual contribution
to the idea.
And the experimentalists get their credit for doing the work.
In both cases, the attribution trail isn't some after-the-
fact accounting.
Instead, it's baked into the ongoing research process.
So we got very excited about this model and whether it might
support our researchers' everyday work and also allow for this natural sort
of self-organizing system for modular science.
So we've spent the last number of years developing open source
plug-ins for some of our favorite note-taking apps like Obs
idian or Rome Research in which I'm presenting in order to
make life easier for the researchers in our labs.
These plug-ins help grad students, postdocs, undergraduates to
orient their projects in context with open questions and key hypotheses and
keep them on track towards the question that they decided they wanted
to answer.
It allows them to inventory super early stage results as soon as
they think they might have an observation and share them with the
team every week in our group meetings and then synthesize those
results into scientific arguments and scientific stories in context with the published
literature so that they have rigorous and updatable stories of the
state of knowledge for their research field.
And so we've found that running our labs on this information
model has enabled large-scale collaboration, coordination, and sense-making among members
of our lab.
So here's a couple examples showing how using discourse graphs as
our lab's graph-based shared lab notebook and meetings documentation and
storyboard for our manuscripts and stories has led to a rich
ly interconnected graph of questions, claims, claims, and evidence that our lab
runs on.
In this visualization, each line represents a single reference of one person
's question, claim, or evidence by another person in our 10-person
lab that grows over the three and a half years of our
lab's creation, which shows how around 3,500 of these cross-
author references have been generated, indicating that we are building off of
each other's intellectual work in real time.
This is both evidence from the published literature as well as new
evidence from our ongoing experiments and simulations.
And we're even building theories of knowledge where one person's
evidence supports somebody else's hypothesis.
Here's another example showing that we're not only sharing knowledge,
but we're also distributing the work, the requested experiments.
In this plot we show the transfer of a requested experiment.
Somebody says, "You know, this analysis experiment is a good idea.
Somebody should do it.
I don't have time to do it right now, but either
me in the future or an undergraduate will come in, see this
dashboard, claim it, and say, "This is how I can contribute to
important problems in the lab." And so this diagram shows how the
transfer of experiments that were requested and then claimed, often by a
different person in the lab, and some of which culminate in
a new observation that completes the experiment.
I have the result.
I have the analysis.
Here's the outcome.
We can close this issue.
And so this show, and the other thing I love about this
transfer is that a number of these posts and claiming and completion
of experiments were done entirely without my knowledge until they were completed,
which as the principal investigator gives me a lot of assurance that
researchers are getting the mentorship that they need from each other, finding
important work to do, and having a very clear trail of who
did the work work in a self-organizing fashion.
So in this case, something like 30% of these issues, requests
for experiments, were claimed.
40% of them yielded a result, and 15% of
those happened between different lab members.
So with this proof of concept within our own labs, we now
seek to bring these tools in a pilot program to other research
labs throughout North America.
So we're halfway through a user pilot supported by the Chan
Zuckerberg Initiative and the Navigation Fund, in which we develop
these plugins so that they are easy to use for these research
labs and organizations so that they may better track their experiments, post
research updates, and synthesize their work into their ongoing manuscripts, etc.
What we found so far is that these discourse graphs help researchers,
for example, synthesize results into scientific stories in context with the
literature.
First, in this non-linear format, akin to the floor of Lego
bricks that Rowan just described, here we're looking at an
open canvas where the researcher in Obsidian can share these individual
experiments, results, meaning evidence, and claims in this open graph along with
whatever notes he might want to include and connect them into this
non-linear graph.
He calls this his murder board or his whodunit
pertaining to his research question that is grounded in the individual evidence
from the literature and from his ongoing experimental observations.
And he uses it to plan what is the right experiment to
do next and communicate to the rest of his lab what his
findings are.
We're making it possible for him to share individual results with
collaborators or wider networks of researchers, but it's also possible to
compile these individual results into a figure for a traditional manuscript if
that's what you need to do.
So here's an example from our lab where an undergraduate is
compiling the figures for his manuscript starting with the question.
Each panel of the figure corresponds to one piece of evidence.
It's an observation that you put there because it's strengthening
your overall claim that you're trying to make in the figure.
So using discourse graphs demystifies the process of compiling
or recompiling your scientific narrative from the underlying evidence.
We've found so far that discourse graphs help researchers in the
pilot labs and in our own labs to do the following.
It helps them think like a scientist.
People report through qualitative research that we're doing with Joelle
's lab that they have found huge improvements in their thinking and
doing of science.
And even when they're not using the plug-in, it helps
keep them in the frame of mind.
They call it the discourse graphs frame of mind where they remember
their goal is to be addressing questions by providing evidence that supports
or opposes their hypotheses.
It also helps them feel like a scientist, saying that they now
have the confidence to share a result without having to claim that
they have the be-all end-all interpretation of that result.
They say this is the observation.
Let's all figure out together what you think it means.
I'm just an undergraduate.
And so now they have the confidence to share their results much
earlier than they would have otherwise given that they're sharing it
within a trusted environment of their lab or their collaborators.
Here's another researcher saying that now I have a motivation because
I feel like I have permission to use the words "hyp
othesis" supporting my hypotheses because they're now baked into the
way that I'm sharing my work.
So now I can use those words and that makes it much
easier and makes me feel like I'm a scientist.
And so it feels like it's true progress where I'm
not just sort of collecting data, but I'm generating novel observations
instead of just where do I start.
And very excitingly, we have an early indication that some researchers
feel that documenting their research in discourse graphs better reflects the true
nature of doing science than writing up narratives and making slidesh
ows.
So they say converting to this kind of structure is maybe more
aligned with what the actual process is like of answering research questions
that can be complementary to writing up your long-form narratives, but
may end up being more useful and truer to the way
that the process of science that people actually want to be carrying
out, particularly in collaborations.
I'm also excited about how having this modular graph structure makes
it easy for our research knowledge base to interact with AIs
so that they can give us attributable synthesized information from
our lab knowledge base.
So here I'm plugging in our lab graph into our favorite
AI, Claude, and gave it some instructions for how it can
navigate our graph and asking it to give me an update on
on recent results so that we can have a real-time view
of the key results in the lab and a type of real-
time research assessment.
So it says here are the recent results from the lab and
I'll give you some links, I'll tell you who did
it, I'll tell you how important it is, and we can,
you know, vibe code or any arbitrary visualization or dashboard that we
think might be relevant.
And this, I think, reflects the the heterogeneity of algorithms
that ATProto enables too, where once you and your community
decide what the relevant metrics or what's the most important thing,
then you can show for your community the highest relevance, in this
case individual results connected to the key questions, motivated by a piece
of evidence that I collected that's in my one of my
postdoc papers and connected to an undergraduate's result as well
that you can freely navigate through the graph and then also contribute
to.
We now can share our research not only in long-form narratives
but also in these modular research elements which we call the evidence
bundle.
The evidence bundle is a data object that contains the observation, the
key figure, and a little bit of methods context and optionally
the the raw data and the plots that led to the creation
of this plot, which get remixed and reused in different
contexts.
The evidence bundle was born in my lab notebook in Rome and
I use our discourse graph software to inventory it and update it
over time.
It then becomes a persistent object in the lab's graph with
enough information for the rest of the lab to understand it, which
we can then connect into these mini discourse graphs that support our
ongoing hypotheses.
We put this in the repository somewhere and then we can use
it to compile either a traditional narrative or multiple narratives in different
venues for different audiences and then we can also post it on
on blue sky.
Right now as a prototype this evidence bundle lives in gith
ub but there's no reason it couldn't live on a
personal data server and then take advantage of the many apps and
tools that many of you in the audience are building and I
would love to do that together.
So we are very excited about the promise for modular research as
a way to support people's ongoing science.
We think for it to take hold we need to have the
attribution of your modular research contributions be more valuable useful and
accurate than the current method of counting up the authorships in
journal articles.
So we are working on that technology and on demonstrating the ability
to do modular research attribution.
So here you might have two labs that are working on a
similar question.
We'd like to make it possible if they each have their
own discourse graphs for each person to be able to submit one
result and have it cited by the other lab or their larger
community and one lab can request an experiment.
Each result has shared upon metadata in a schema of the type
that Rowan just described so that you can attribute each person
's contribution in a way that initially requires some access control so
that they're willing to share their work individually and then is
more widely shareable.
We're making this possible in a workshop catalyzing modular
interoperable research attribution and in a workshop in Ireland
in June where we're bringing together tool builders and researchers to
make a proof of concept a system by which you can trade
individual research elements and Ronan and I have co-founded a
community of organizations called the Kairos Network which is meant
to support different tool building organizations that have shared values that are
committed to interoperability so that modular research can be carried
out with the hope that it becomes a persistent and sustainable source
of support for this tool this new tool building ecosystem.
So in summary by decoupling research into its atomic elements
questions claims and evidence and connecting them into a graph we enable
trainees experts and AIs alike to make discrete contributions to shared
research collaborations in a way where you can see the direct proven
ance you can attribute each person's contribution and you can build
upon it in a way that leaves space for each researcher to
be recognized and allows them to work collaboratively with AIs
and with each other and preserve the most fun parts of doing
research together.
Thank you.
Okay, that was excellent.
Can you hear me?
Is this mic?
So any question?
And Rowan?
Okay, I'll start.
Go Crop.
Can I just before
just for the streaming uh the question was about can we get
the research funding organizations
on board are summarized yeah so
I do think there are there is movement on the research funding
agencies Gates Foundation came out with some changes about a year ago
focusing more on preprints than the sort of journal artifact that
was followed through by Howard Hughes Medical Institute about a month and
a half ago and then Michael J Fox Foundation just like two
weeks ago has changed their policy so there is actually movement that
's happening in that space one of the things that I do
at Curvenote is we run internal workspaces for
Howard Hughes Medical Institute for example and a large part of that
is actually compliance dashboards for the open access researchers so that
they can have different metrics on on sort of how they're
assessing research that can then like have some of these like different
skews towards data or evidence or sort of the actual mechanisms
and process of science rather than sort of the end artifact so
I do I think there's room to be optimistic sort of
up and down this the stack of research all the way up
to these sort of funders all the way at the end
okay who's next moving along
yes so
could you repeat the question uh so yeah there's most of
scientific research is actually closed access a lot of it more recently
is moving towards open access but there are still a lot of
paywalls in this space from
my specific focus i'm like looking forward like the future is
open the future is open access and sort of building these modular
tools around that and using those to reinforce practices in that space
that allow people to sort of share openly as well and so
i think that's that's my goal personally
so i think also and maybe matt you want to talk about
this because i think there is like that early stage where you
are in a much more trusted environment and you have these sort
of circles of trust that you want to build i think it
's not um appropriate necessarily to share everything openly all the time
for everyone and so i definitely think that we need these like
ways of working that support tight-knit trusted communities and that
that is especially important yeah we we think you can you can
reuse these individual like panels from from an existing figure from an
existing published paper and reuse it for your own purposes in your
sort of collaborations knowledge graph as a sort of fair reuse example
and as rowan was saying more and more of these published
papers even if they end up in a closed journal have an
open preprint alternative and so the more accessible that each pre
print becomes the more that becomes the the genuinely useful unit for
knowledge yeah
for us it's making
sure you have the right time stamp and making sure that you
can you can see which reference that you made we haven't
found it necessary to have some sort of auto update yet like
a notification is is is is enough at this
stage um so for the the current scope that we're looking
at we found it sufficient to have this persistent object and you
get an update if the if it changes because we're not
trying to algorithmically generate conclusions yet i think so long as
there are timestamps and you can scroll forward and backward in
the history of the result that will get us a lot of
the way there a lot of the way there is
yeah so so one part is in structuring the the content
so that it's clear that there should be a place where
there's methods context and then you you share it and you
talk about it in a way that you think other people in
your lab will be able to understand and right now in a
relative freeform manner you can also include comments uh in a
way that we're just sort of hacking into like locally for
for rome research but i think it's important to have
basically the conversation and those those comments connected into uh the the
the the back story so right now for for every app that
we use we just allow the sort of threaded conversation to be
to be associated and it sort of gives it's almost like
an extended part of the lab notebook that you then eventually sort
of close and you can see the history even though most people
are going to just like in wikipedia want to see
that yeah yeah right now what we find is that so for
example there was an undergraduate who joined the labs looking for a
project to work on and he had heard in lab meeting from
this other uh postbac researcher and thought i like how
this person works let me go see if they have any open
issues and that is an excuse for me to go message him
on slack and then talk to him in person and get more
of the in-person mentorship so the the matching happened through the
app and much of the mentorship was still live in person informal
yeah
so the question is can other plans to allow people to publish
into the app proto system uh and yes so we're designing
the systems for people to be able to share from one graph
to another and then uh more publicly as well um so we
have a draft schema uh for for sharing peer-to-peer
and we have a draft lexicon i learned yesterday that
isn't in use yet um but the the hope is during
this in-person modular attribution workshop we make it uh technically
possible and show examples of people being able to share um keeping
in mind that the first the majority of use cases at first
are this peer-to-peer so so long as there's
some you know access controls between people's uh pds's
i think it'll it'll take off and then you like
flip the switch when when they're ready to and
you like to share it more openly so there's there's
at some point there's malicious actors and there's motivation for
that uh scarcity of jobs reputation etc and uh so you know
stealing attribution and stuff i mean there's there's mechanisms
these people have tried to use for this from back and forth
right so uh um i guess what i haven't heard is
anything about authentication and and security and and adversary models for when
somebody tries to gain this new system uh and you know you
don't want to do what the web unfortunately is which was
filled with it and then move on to security off to the
outside so have you thought about that yeah i mean i think
that's what that's what app proto can be so good
for if you're going to tie this oh yeah yeah so
the so the question is uh what do you do about security
what do you do about attempts to game the system um that
have been tried with the current version of publishing uh that um
that people will will eventually try in this system as well um
so having this uh persistent identifier for you and your history of
work i think goes a long way seeing the extent to which
your work is reproduced by others in other contexts and having
that be a signal that some communities elevate i think will will
help a lot as well and for us having the sharing be
with your trusted communities who you have a social connection to through
conferences etc makes it more likely that you will have some social
cohesion as you uh eventually share to a public platform with
with that that lacks context but i think having these expanding circles
of of communities and and trusts who are genuinely interested in addressing
the research question together has been a missing part in the first
generation of platforms and sharing yeah i think one one one thing
that i'll maybe add to that is even or like if
we're looking at some of these sort of attacks today are
like hallucinated references that are just like completely made up and
in this better network like where you can actually like hover over
something and see if that thing exists like that just that like
better formats like wipes out a whole sort of side of the
attack and then i think again leaning on some of the expertise
that has built up in the social media space around moderation and
and that side i think that is more mature than what is
in the scientific space right now okay